# Computer Science Laboratory \#6

## Part 1 - Basic Loops

**[1.1]** When you use an automated teller machine (ATM) with your bank card, you need to use a personal identification number (PIN) to access your account. If a user fails more than three times when entering the PIN, the machine will block the card. Assume that the user’s PIN is “1234” and write a program that asks the user for the PIN no more than three times, and does the following:

- If the user enters the right number, print a message saying, “Your PIN is correct”, and end the program.
-  If the user enters a wrong number, print a message saying, “Your PIN is incorrect” and, if you have asked for the PIN less than three times, ask for it again.
- If the user enters a wrong number three times, print a message saying “Your bank card is blocked” and end the program.

**[1.2]** French country names are feminine when they end with the letter **e**, masculine otherwise, except for the following which are masculine even though they end with **e**:
- le Belize
- le Cambodge
- le Mexique
- le Mozambique
- le Zaïre
- le Zimbabwe

Write a program that reads the French name of a country and adds the article: `le` for masculine or `la` for feminine, such as `le Canada` or `la Belgique`. However, if the country name starts with a vowel, use `l’`; for example, `l’Afghanistan`.
For the following plural country names, use “les”:
- les Etats-Unis
- les Pays-Bas

**[1.3]** Write a program that asks the user for an integer and then prints out all its factors. For example, when the user enters 150, the program should print

`2`

`3`

`5`

`5`

**[1.4]** Write an application to pre-sell a limited number of cinema tickets. Each buyer can buy as many as 4 tickets. No more than 100 tickets can be sold. Implement a program that prompts the user for the desired number of tickets and then displays the number of remaining tickets. Repeat until all tickets have been sold, and then display the total number of buyers.

## Part 2 - Applications of Loops

**[2.1]** A simple "random" generator is obtained by the formula 
$$r_{new} = (\alpha \times r_{old} + \beta ) \ mod \ m$$
where $\alpha,\beta,r$ and $m$ are integers. Moreover, the value $r_{new}$ is equal to $r_{old}$ in the next step of the computation. Write a program that asks the user to enter an initial value for $r_{old}$. Then print the first 100 random integers generated by this formula, using: 
- $\alpha$ = 32310901
- $\beta$ = 1729
- $m$ = 224

**[2.2]** **The Drunkard’s Walk**. A drunkard in a grid of streets randomly picks one of four directions and stumbles to the next intersection, then again randomly picks one of four directions, and so on. You might think that on average the drunkard doesn’t move far because the choices cancel each other out, but that is actually not the case. Represent locations as integer pairs (x, y). Implement the drunkard’s walk over 100 intersections, starting at (0,0), and print the ending location.

**[2.3]** **Predator-Prey Simulation**. The [Lotka-Volterra equations](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Lotka–Volterra_equations) describe a predator-prey ecological model that is based on a set of fixed positive constants:

- The growth rate of prey
- The rate of killing of prey by predators 
- The mortality rate of predators 
- The rate of increase of predators through the consumption of prey

Considering these constants, the following conditions hold in this model:

1. The population of prey $x$:
   - increases at rate $dx=Ax \ dt$ (proportional ot the number of prey) 
   - is simultaneously destroyed by predators at a rate $dx=-B\ xy\ dt$ (proportional to the product of the numbers of prey and predators)
2. A population of predators $y$: 
   - decreases at a rate $dy = -C \ y \ dt$ (proportional to the number of predators) 
   - increases at a rate $dy = D \ xy \ dt$ (proportional to the product of the number of prey and predators)

From these conditions, the following system of equations is derived:

$$\frac{dx}{dt} = Ax \ - Bxy$$
$$\frac{dy}{dt} = -Cy \ + Dxy$$

This means that considering two time periods `n` and `n+1` the variation in the number of populations of prey (`x`) and predators (`y`) from one period to another is given by 

- $x_{n+1} = x_n \times (1+A - B\times y_n)$
- $y_{n+1} = y_n \times (1-C + D\times x_n)$ 

Write a program that asks the user the input values of the four constants, the initial number of prey and predators’ populations, and the number of periods to be simulated. After, the program calculates and display the number of the two populations in each of the periods considered. As test input, use $A$ = 0.1, $B$ = 0.01, $C$ = 0.01 and $D$ = 0.00002, with initial populations of prey and predators of 1000 and 20, respectively.

**[2.4]** **Electrical transformers**. Transformers are often built by winding coils of wire around a ferrite core. The figure illustrates a situation that occurs in various audio devices such as cell phones and music players and music players. In this circuit, a transformer is used to connect a speaker to the output of an audio amplifier to the output of an audio amplifier.

```      
         R0 = 20Ω               1:n
    .----/\/\/\-----*------.            .-------*------------.
    |                       \    ||    /                     |    /|
    |                        |   ||   |                     ___  / | ~~~
  -----  Vs = 40V           /    ||    \        Rs = 8Ω    |   |/  | ~~~
   ---                      \    ||    /                   |   |\  | ~~~
    |                        |   ||   |                    |___| \ | ~~~
    |                       /    ||    \                     |    \|
    .---------------*------.            .-------*------------.
          Amplifier          Transformer                Speaker
```

The symbol used to represent the transformer is intended to suggest two coils of wire. The parameter n of the transformer is called the “turns ratio” of the transformer. (The number of times that a wire is wrapped around the core to form a coil is called the number of turns in the coil. The turns ratio is literally the ratio of the number of turns in the two coils of wire.)
When designing the circuit, we are concerned primarily with the value of the power delivered to the speakers—that power causes the speakers to produce the sounds we want to hear. Suppose we were to connect the speakers directly to the amplifier without using the transformer. Some fraction of the power available from the amplifier would get to the speakers. The rest of the available power would be lost in the amplifier itself. The transformer is added to the circuit to increase the fraction of the amplifier power that is delivered to the speakers. The power, Ps, delivered to the speakers is calculated using the formula 

$$ P_s = R_s (\frac{nV_s}{n^2R_0+R_s})^2$$

Write a program that models the circuit shown and varies the turns ratio from 0.01 to 2 in 0.01 increments, then determines the value of the turns ratio that maximizes the power delivered to the speakers.

# Computer Science Laboratory \#6

## Part 1 – Single functions

**[06.1.1]** **Speech Count.** Write the function: 
`def count_vowels(string)`
Returns the number of vowels in the string. Vowels are the letters `a`, `e`, `i`, `o`, and `u`;  as well as their respective capitalized versions. [P5.6]

**[06.1.2]** Word Count. Write the function: 
`def count_words(string)` 
Returns the number of words in the string. Words are sequences of characters separated by spaces (assume that between two consecutive words, there is exactly one space). For example, `count_words("Mary had a little lamb")` returns `5`. 

How could the exercise be extended so that strings, where there are multiple spaces between words, are correctly treated? [P5.7]

**[06.1.3]** **Geometric solids.** Write functions:
`def sphere_volume(r)`
`def sphere_surface(r)`
`def cylinder_volume(r, h)`
`def cylinder_surface(r, h)`
`def cone_volume(r, h)`
`def cone_surface(r, h)`

To calculate the volume and surface area of a sphere of radius `r`, `a` cylinder with a circular base of radius `r` and height `h` and `a` cone with a circular base with radius `r` and height `h`. Then write a program that asks the user to enter the values `r` and `h`, then the program calls the six functions and display the output results. [P5.9]

**[06.1.4]** **Bank Balance.** Write a function that calculates the balance of a bank account by crediting interest annually. The function receives as parameters: the number of years, the initial balance, and the annual interest rate. [P5.22]

## Part 2 – Algorithms that make use of functions

**[6.2.1]** **NGOs.** A non-governmental organization needs a program to calculate the share of financial benefit to be allocated to each family in need of assistance. The formula is as follows: 
   - I. If the family's annual income is between `$30000` and `$40000` and the family has at least `3` children, the subsidy is `$1000` for each child;  
   - II. If the family's annual income is between `$20000` and  `$30000` and the family has at least `2` children, the subsidy is `$1500` for each child;  
   - III. If the family's annual income is less than `$20,000`, the subsidy is `$2,000` for each child. 
Write a function to perform these calculations. Then write a program that, in a cycle, asks the user to provide the annual income and the number of children of each family requesting the subsidy, displaying the corresponding value returned by the function. Use  `–1` as the sentinel value to finish entering data. [P5.28]

**[06.2.2]** **Roman Numbers.** Write a program that converts a Roman numeral, such as `MCMLXXVIII`, into its decimal representation. 
Tip: First, write a function that returns the numeric value of each individual letter, then use the following algorithm: 
```
total = 0 
s = string corresponding to the Roman numeral
Until s is empty
   If s has length 1, or the value of its first character is greater than or equal to the value of its second character
      Add the value of the first character of s to the total
      Remove the first character from s
   Otherwise 
      difference = (value of the second character of s) – (value of the first character of s)
      Add the difference value to the total
      Remove the first two characters from s
```
[P5.27]

**[06.2.3]** **Aerodynamic drag.** The drag force on a car is given by:

$F_{D}=\frac{1}{2}\rho \nu^2 A C_{D} $

Where  $\rho$ is the air density $(1.23kg/m^3)$,  $\nu$ is the velocity in $m/s$,  $A$ is the projected area of the car $(2.5m^2)$ and $C_{D}$ is the drag coefficient $(0.2)$. The amount of power in watts needed to overcome the resistance force is $P=F_{D}\nu$, and the equivalent power in horsepower is $H_p=P/745.7$. Write a program that receives the car's speed and calculates the power in watts and horsepower needed to overcome the resulting resistance force. [P5.36]

**[06.2.4]** **Electrical wire.** The electric wire is a cylindrical conductor covered with an insulating material. The resistance of a wire is given by the formula:

$R=\frac{\rho L}{A}=\frac{4\rho L}{\pi d^2}$

Where  $\rho$ is the resistivity of the conductor $L$ and $A$, and $d$ are the length, cross-sectional area, and wire diameter, respectively. The resistivity of copper is $(1.678 x 10^{-8} \ohm m)$. The diameter $d$ of the wire, is commonly specified by the American Wire Gauge (`AWG`), which is an integer value. The diameter of an AWG-&n& wire is given by the formula:

$d=0.127 x 92 ^{\frac{36-n}{39}}mm$

Write a function
`def diameter(wire_gauge)`
that accepts the wire gauge and returns the corresponding diameter. Write another function
`def copper_wire_resistance(length, wire_gauge)`
that accepts the length and gauge of a piece of copper wire and returns its resistance.
The resistivity of aluminum is  $(2.82 x 10^{-8} \ohm m)$. Write a third function
`def aluminum_wire_resistance(length, wire_gauge)`
that accepts the length and gauge of a piece of aluminum wire and returns its resistance. Then write a program to test these functions. [P5.35]
